Start a Github Template lesson for 03/05/2024 (#84)
Arcadia-Science/arcadia-computational-training: docs/arcadia-users-group/20240305-github-templates/lesson.md

## Creating a new repository using a template

### Choosing the Right Template

Depending on the analysis type or the technology stack used in your project, select the appropriate template. 
For instance, use `r-analysis-template` for R-based analyses, `python-analysis-template` for Python projects, `snakemake-template` for workflows managed with Snakemake, and `nextflow-template` for Nextflow pipelines.

<details>
<summary>Why isn't there a Python package template?</summary>

We could create one. 
We haven't generated one yet because there are a ton templates out there that could be used and we haven't created many Python packages yet as an organization.
If you find yourself in need of a Python template, try out <a href=https://github.com/TezRomacH/python-package-template>an existing template</a> and make note of what works well and what doesn't.
We can then use that to generate a future organization standard template.

</details>

### Repository Initialization

> There are two ways to create a new repo with a template.

Reviewer: I wonder if we should reframe this as an explicit list of steps, which people will walk through together during the AUG.

Author: ya that is my plan, I am going to lead people through this. I won't have the lesson up at that point, I'm going to do a show and follow me demonstration. Since this is my plan, do you think it's ok to leave the lesson as is, or should i re-write it to make it more clear that that is my plan?

Reviewer: It might be nice to do a walkthrough style approach, as was done for previous AUGs; esp. for folks who will be reviewing the lesson at a later date! Basically the only change would be to reformat the paragraph as a bulleted / numbered list.

Author: done, thank you!

First, you can navigate to the template you want to start from (e.x. https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/python-analysis-template) and click the green "Use this template" button in the upper right hand corner.
This will take you to the New Repository launch screen with the "Repository template" section already filled out.
Alternatively, you can the "+" button in the upper right hand corner of any GitHub page and select "New repository" from the drop down menu.
On the New Repository launch screen, select the template you wish to start from in the "Repository template" drop down menu.
In either case, fill out the rest of the new repository information and click the "Create repository" button.
This will generate a new repository that already has all of the files and folders that were in the template.

> After your new repository is created, *create a new branch* before you start making any changes.

Reviewer: Can we put this in a bright color with highlighting or something? A common problem is that people are committing directly to main, bypassing review. I don't know if this is possible, but it would be great to have branch protections requiring review + checks passing set by default within the template; I have had to set these manually for some repos that I've been reviewing.

Reviewer: Looks great, thanks for implementing this!

- [envs/dev.yml](https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/python-analysis-template/tree/main/envs/dev.yml): By default, we recommend analysis repositories use conda to manage software installations and record software versions. The `envs` directory is where these yaml files are stored. The `dev.yml` file installs python, jupyter, pip, and linting software.
- [LICENSE](https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/python-analysis-template/tree/main/LICENSE): The LICENSE file specifies the terms under which the software can be freely used, modified, and shared. Technically, software must have a license for it to be re-usable by others. The default license for all of our GitHub repositories is MIT, however the license may need to change depending on the software the project uses and the code it includes. Be sure to check with legal about your license before making a GitHub repository public.

> - [.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE.md](https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/python-analysis-template/tree/main/.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE.md): The .github folder controls some behavior of the GitHub repository itself. The PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE.md is a text document where users can provide the text that they want to appear by default each time a new PR is opened. Often, these files remind users of the list of things that need to be done before a PR is read to be reviewed.

Reviewer: Would it be worthwhile to also walk through the experience of opening a PR/ issue as part of a practical demo to illustrate what the templates provide? We could show a repo that hasn't used a template/ doesn't have the configs set up for PRs and issues, and show how much nicer it is to have some templates.

I wonder if it also might be good for folks to go through a dummy PR to understand what branch protections are and why we should be using them for new projects, as well as where/ how to see that linting checks are passing.

Author: both are great ideas and will for sure do these while leading the lesson. Same question as above -- to what extent do you think I should update the lesson with these examples vs. just showing them? I think a three paned PR template file,  opening a new PR in a repo with a template, and opening a new PR in a repo with no template is a great viz i'll put together  -- any others I should include?

Reviewer: Looks good to me! Thanks for doing this!

### Checking for accuracy, enforcing conventions, and making your life easier

- [.gitignore](https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/python-analysis-template/tree/main/.gitignore): The `.gitignore` file lists files and directories that should be ignored by git, meaning they won't be tracked or included in the repository. This typically includes temporary files, local configuration files, and sensitive information. Using a .gitignore file helps keep the repository clean and prevents the accidental inclusion of irrelevant or sensitive files.

> - [.github/lint.yml](https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/python-analysis-template/tree/main/.github/lint.yml): The `.github/lint.yml` file is a GitHub Actions configuration file that sets up linting for the repository. Linting automatically checks the code for stylistic errors, programming errors, and other potential issues according to predefined rules. This helps maintain code quality and consistency across the project, making it easier to read, maintain, and contribute to.

Reviewer: Could be nice to link back to the linting AUG.

- [.vscode/extensions.json](https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/python-analysis-template/tree/main/.vscode/extensions.json): The `.vscode/extensions.json` file is a configuration file for Visual Studio Code that specifies recommended extensions for the project. This file will prompt VS Code to install the ruff linter.
- [Makefile](https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/python-analysis-template/tree/main/Makefile): The `Makefile` helps automate code quality and style checks, making it easier for developers to run all of these checks at once.

## Benefits of templates

- **Low effort for best practices:** The python analysis template repository have 10 files. While none of these files are complicated on their own, creating each of them takes time and domain knowledge of tools and syntax. Further, if each user had to create each file on their own, there is a lot of room for error. Using a template saves this time and cuts down on the number of mistakes that users create in their repos while reinforcing best practices.

> - **Reviewed once:** When a repository is started from a template, all of the code and files from that template are instantiated on the `main` branch. As you make your changes, reviewers only need to review the things you change, not all of the files from the template. This saves reviewers time because they don't have to review similar or idential text between many different repositories -- the content of a README.md or GitHub action workflow are reviewed when they are added to or changed in the template only. Overall, this saves reviewers time.

Reviewer: TIL that this is a benefit of templates! Haven't dealt with this myself but it makes sense.

Author: LOL mert made this clear to me by reviewing the same text over. and over. and over. in my repo readmes 😂

Templates typically include everything from README files, installation guides, contribution guidelines, and more.

In this lesson, we will focus on Arcadia's [`python-analysis-template`](https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/python-analysis-template).
Arcadia also has an [`r-analysis-template`](https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/r-analysis-template), a [`snakemake-template`](https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/snakemake-template), and a [`nextflow-template`](https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/nextflow-template).

## Creating a new repository using a template

### Choosing the Right Template

Depending on the analysis type or the technology stack used in your project, select the appropriate template. 
For instance, use `r-analysis-template` for R-based analyses, `python-analysis-template` for Python projects, `snakemake-template` for workflows managed with Snakemake, and `nextflow-template` for Nextflow pipelines.

<details>
<summary>Why isn't there a Python package template?</summary>

We could create one. 
We haven't generated one yet because there are a ton templates out there that could be used and we haven't created many Python packages yet as an organization.

> If you find yourself in need of a Python template, try out <a href=https://github.com/TezRomacH/python-package-template>an existing template</a> and make note of what works well and what doesn't.

Reviewer 2: should we note here that people can also ask the software team for help with this (or is that implied/understood)?

We can then use that to generate a future organization standard template.

</details>

### Repository Initialization

There are two ways to create a new repo with a template.
First, you can navigate to the template you want to start from (e.x. https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/python-analysis-template) and click the green "Use this template" button in the upper right hand corner.
This will take you to the New Repository launch screen with the "Repository template" section already filled out.

> Alternatively, you can the "+" button in the upper right hand corner of any GitHub page and select "New repository" from the drop down menu.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you can click the "+" button in the upper right hand corner of any GitHub page and select "New repository" from the drop down menu.
```
I think there is a word missing here. I'm not sure `click` is better than `use` or `select`, or something different though.

On the New Repository launch screen, select the template you wish to start from in the "Repository template" drop down menu.
In either case, fill out the rest of the new repository information and click the "Create repository" button.
This will generate a new repository that already has all of the files and folders that were in the template.

!!! warning "Working in branches"

>     After your new repository is created, **create a new branch** before you start making any changes.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure if this is just the view for the PR preview but this is all un-formatted text so the style elements make it a bit harder to read.

    Do your work in branches and when you are ready to merge your changes into the `main` branch, open a Pull Request and request a review.
    For more on how to use branches, [see this lesson](https://training.arcadiascience.com/workshops/20220920-intro-to-git-and-github/lesson/#working-on-branches).
    For more on why we think code review is important, [see this blog post](https://www.codegram.com/blog/an-ode-to-code-reviews/) (note we didn't write this blog post, we just agree with a lot of the content). 
    **We recommend setting up branch protection rules** that can prevent code from making it into `main` with out a Pull Request and review.
    <details>

>     <summary>How to set up branch protection rules in your repository</summary>

Author: ah good catch, fixed!

    Branch protection rules are configured by clicking on the "branches" menu item on the lefthand side of the repo "settings" page.
    The following Branch protection rules should be enabled:
    <li>**Require a pull request before merging**: this blocks *anyone* from pushing directly to the main branch (this is particularly important to prevent accidental pushes directly to the public repo `main` when updating the public repo from the private repo).</li>
    <li>**Require approvals:** this requires that there be at least one approving reviews before a PR can be merged. For public repos, the minimum number should probably be two (since public PRs may be from untrusted external users).</li>
    <li>**Require status checks to pass before merging**: this blocks PRs from being merged until all of the CI checks are passing.</li>
    <li>**Dismiss stale pull request approvals when new commits are pushed”:** this should be enabled in the public repo to require that the most recent reviewable commit has been reviewed and approved (we don’t need this requirement in the private repo, since we can trust internal folks not to push substantive commits without review).</li>

>     <li>**Require linear history**”: this prevents PRs from being merged without squash-merging (this will need to be overridden when merging sync PRs).</li>

Author: ok thanks, i'll remove this bullet point and assume the people who need this information know where to get it!

    </details>

## Anatomy of a template: Python analysis template

We can create a new repo from a template!
But what is actually in the template and what do those files do?
Below we go through each file in the [`python-analysis-template`](https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/python-analysis-template) and discuss their functions and how template users can interact with them.

### Documentation and re-use

> - [README.md](https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/python-analysis-template/blob/main/README.md): This README has two sections. The first is an outline for the documentation for the new repository. It includes boiler plate sections and language that we expect will be standard across most projects, as well as TODO statements where specific details need to be changed or filled in. The second section covers developer notes detailing what the files in the repository do and tips for how to use them. The second section should eventually be deleted but is included for ease of use.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [README.md](https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/python-analysis-template/blob/main/README.md): This README has two sections. The first is an outline for the documentation for the new repository. It includes boilerplate sections and language that we expect will be standard across most projects, as well as TODO statements where specific details need to be changed or filled in. The second section covers developer notes detailing what the files in the repository do and tips for how to use them. The second section should be deleted in repos created from the template but is included to make the template easier to understand and use.
```

> - [envs/dev.yml](https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/python-analysis-template/tree/main/envs/dev.yml): By default, we recommend analysis repositories use conda to manage software installations and record software versions. The `envs` directory is where these yaml files are stored. The `dev.yml` file installs python, jupyter, pip, and linting software.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [envs/dev.yml](https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/python-analysis-template/tree/main/envs/dev.yml): By default, we recommend analysis repositories use conda to manage software installations and record software versions. The `envs` directory is where these yaml files are stored. The `dev.yml` file included in the template is not empty but lists the packages required by the template: python, jupyter, pip, and linting software.
```

![](pr-template.png)

### Checking for accuracy, enforcing conventions, and making your life easier

- [.gitignore](https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/python-analysis-template/tree/main/.gitignore): The `.gitignore` file lists files and directories that should be ignored by git, meaning they won't be tracked or included in the repository. This typically includes temporary files, local configuration files, and sensitive information. Using a .gitignore file helps keep the repository clean and prevents the accidental inclusion of irrelevant or sensitive files.

> - [.github/lint.yml](https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/python-analysis-template/tree/main/.github/lint.yml): The `.github/lint.yml` file is a GitHub Actions configuration file that sets up linting for the repository. Linting automatically checks the code for stylistic errors, programming errors, and other potential issues according to predefined rules. This helps maintain code quality and consistency across the project, making it easier to read, maintain, and contribute to (see [this AUG lesson](https://training.arcadiascience.com/arcadia-users-group/20240206-intro-to-formatting-and-linting/lesson/) for more details).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [.github/lint.yml](https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/python-analysis-template/tree/main/.github/lint.yml): The `.github/lint.yml` file defines a GitHub Actions workflow that sets up linting for the repository. Linting automatically checks the code for stylistic errors, programming errors, and other potential issues according to predefined rules. This helps maintain code quality and consistency across the project, making it easier to read, maintain, and contribute to (see [this AUG lesson](https://training.arcadiascience.com/arcadia-users-group/20240206-intro-to-formatting-and-linting/lesson/) for more details).
```

- [.pre-commit-config.yaml](https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/python-analysis-template/tree/main/.pre-commit-config.yaml): The `.pre-commit-config.yaml` file configures pre-commit hooks for the repository. Pre-commit hooks are scripts that run automatically on each commit to check for common issues, such as syntax errors, formatting issues, or failing tests. This setup helps catch and fix problems early in the development process, improving code quality and reducing the time spent on code reviews.

> - [.vscode/extensions.json](https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/python-analysis-template/tree/main/.vscode/extensions.json): The `.vscode/extensions.json` file is a configuration file for Visual Studio Code that specifies recommended extensions for the project. This file will prompt VS Code to install the ruff linter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [.vscode/extensions.json](https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/python-analysis-template/tree/main/.vscode/extensions.json): The `.vscode/extensions.json` file is a configuration file for Visual Studio Code that specifies recommended extensions for the project. This file will prompt VS Code to use `ruff` for linting and formatting. 
```

- [Makefile](https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/python-analysis-template/tree/main/Makefile): The `Makefile` helps automate code quality and style checks, making it easier for developers to run all of these checks at once.

> ## Benefits of templates

Reviewer 2: another benefit: consistency across the org (so we don't have different projects using different package managers, directory strutures, linting tools, etc)

- **Reviewed once:** When a repository is started from a template, all of the code and files from that template are instantiated on the `main` branch. As you make your changes, reviewers only need to review the things you change, not all of the files from the template. This saves reviewers time because they don't have to review similar or idential text between many different repositories -- the content of a README.md or GitHub action workflow are reviewed when they are added to or changed in the template only. Overall, this saves reviewers time.
![](why-templates.png)
- **Feedback in one place:** Templates themselves are repositories, meaning they have Issues and Pull Requests. Users can report problems with a template or enhancements they'd like to see. When bugs are fixed or enhancements integrated, these changes are visible to every future project at Arcadia. This saves others from debugging the same problem you already fixed and helps keep all of our projects up to date. Some examples of this in action include:

> 	* When Snakemake upgraded to version 8, the command line interface changed and a syntax was needed to launch a workflow with conda. Keith caught this change and documented it in the Snakemake template README.md file. When I started a new snakemake workflow, I used Keith's template documentation to launch my workflow and didn't need to spend time looking up the new command.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
	* When Snakemake upgraded to version 8, the command line interface changed and a syntax update was needed to launch a workflow with conda. Keith caught this change and documented it in the Snakemake template README.md file. When I started a new snakemake workflow, I used Keith's template documentation to launch my workflow and didn't need to spend time looking up the new command.
```

> 	* When Snakemake upgraded to version 8, the command line interface changed and a syntax was needed to launch a workflow with conda. Keith caught this change and documented it in the Snakemake template README.md file. When I started a new snakemake workflow, I used Keith's template documentation to launch my workflow and didn't need to spend time looking up the new command.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	* When Snakemake upgraded to version 8, the command line interface changed and a syntax was needed to launch a workflow with conda. Keith and Mert caught this change and documented it in the Snakemake template README.md file. When I started a new snakemake workflow, I used their template documentation to launch my workflow and didn't need to spend time looking up the new command.
```
